                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
MIME-Version: 1.0
Sender: aaron.bornstein@gmail.com
Reply-To: aaronb@nyu.edu
Received: by 10.216.18.205 with HTTP; Sun, 4 Jul 2010 06:56:00 -0700 (PDT)
Date: Sun, 4 Jul 2010 15:56:00 +0200
Delivered-To: aaron.bornstein@gmail.com
X-Google-Sender-Auth: D3ogJtzA-eahEfO6RdcRnIdNTGE
Message-ID: <AANLkTikrlKQCzt5C5k86PoRsKION3Vsw1-qNrbnG62It@mail.gmail.com>
Subject: [plagiarists] six months of words, word cup edition
From: Aaron Bornstein <aaronb@nyu.edu>
To: Aaron Bornstein <aaronmb@alum.mit.edu>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=windows-1252
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

dear friends who like words who like friends who like words -

for the half year o1.o1.2o1o -> 06.31.2o1o i present to you this
newest edition, a jetlagged corpus of topically international flair.
true to form, the germans win in a rout.

. o O neotomelogisms!  words i've newly experienced and found pleasing
to one or more senses yet offensive to few or none.  perhaps they will
help you lay a sucker out in a rhyme bout.

      interlard: to insert between; to mix

      sprezzatura: (Italian) originating from Castiglione=92s "The Book
of the Courtier," where it is defined by the author as =93a certain
nonchalance, so as to                                  conceal all art
and make whatever one does or says appear to be without effort and
almost without any thought about it.=94

      kapellmeister: (German) person in charge of music-making.

      gormless: Lacking intelligence, sense or discernment, often
implying lack of capacity of will to remedy the condition;
Inexperienced, na=EFve, innocent
to the point of foolishness [via anya]

      opropaedeutics: the preliminary body of knowledge and rules
necessary for the study of some art or science.

      crepescular: a term used to describe some animals that are
primarily active during twilight, that is at dawn and at dusk (cf
diurnal, nocturnal)

      chevre: (Yiddish) friends, community [anya, really anit this year]

      fingerspitzengef=FChls: (Chinese) Literally 'fingertip feeling',
colloquially it has many meanings: 'flair,' 'intuition,' or 'tact.'

      anthimeria: loosely speaking, when someone verbs a noun. [as in:
"jane is rolling anthimeric"]

      sprue: 1. the passage through which liquid material is
introduced into a mold. 2. a chronic disorder that occurs in tropical
and non-tropical forms and
in both children and adults.symptoms include foul-smelling diarrhea
and emaciation  [aaaand anya with the hat trick!!! someone get her a
vuvuzelya!!!!!]

         by the way, 'sprue' is the most versatile word in form and
concept that i have heard in a while.  variants left as an exercise to
the reader.

. o O lackalogisms! definitions posting a missed connection for their
word-mates:
      nothing new to report here, though i'd still like a word for "an
item (song, object, etc) that sparks reminiscence the very first
time you experience it (ie, the sensation of 'deja new')"

. o O novelogisms! new words or plays-on that i've birthed, midwifed,
or faced a paternity battle over (other than the 30-odd derivatives of
sprue):
      idolate: 1. To worship something or someone alone 2. To worship
one thing 3. To alienate oneself by worshipping something which only
you find worthy of such adulation ("Jim really idolated himself by
putting Keli$ on such a pedestal") [co-produced with fenna m. k.]

      blinglash: the inevitable musical backlash against bling
culture, has appeared in fits and starts but not yet topped the
charts.   blinglash:bling::grunge:hair metal, but will likely not
involve drop tuning nor poor grooming.  [adam and anya on the board
with the assist!]


i'm like a chocoholic, but for words.  feed me!
