MIME-Version: 1.0
Reply-To: aaronmb@alum.mit.edu
Sender: aaron.bornstein@gmail.com
Received: by 10.204.13.214 with HTTP; Sun, 6 Jan 2013 18:09:05 -0800 (PST)
Date: Sun, 6 Jan 2013 21:09:05 -0500
Delivered-To: aaron.bornstein@gmail.com
X-Google-Sender-Auth: ZZ6D9lRY3eMtHt--y2d3fQ7V0FE
Message-ID: <CAAkOH5Vu0SR3uZ8qgN-UA6DJtJbGFJBUny0RvXKMvQ2+ijBY-Q@mail.gmail.com>
Subject: [seventeen] months of words, o8.o1.2o11 - o1.o1.2o13, "Another word
 is possible" edition
From: Aaron Bornstein <aaronmb@alum.mit.edu>
To: Aaron Bornstein <aaronmb@alum.mit.edu>
Content-Type: text/plain; charset=windows-1252
Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-printable

Dear friends who like words... I present to you... 
(drumroll......)

**seventeen** months of words!!

holy wordstuff!  here it is:

----------------


]] -1. Words previous to the words.

Something new: an archive of previous letters-about-words - 
               http://aaron.bornstein.org/words/

I think I've got most of them up there, but if you have any that I'm 
    missing, please do forward them.

For those who are getting this email for the first time, here's a 
    description of what you're looking at:

    This email is, mostly, a compendium of words that have come to my 
    attention since the last time I sent an email about words that 
    have come to my attention.  These words are chosen because I like 
    how they're defined, because I like how they could be defined, 
    because I like the sounds they make, or because something else.
   
    You will notice that the word list itself is chock full of 
    shout-outs to the people who brought each words to my attention.
    This is due to an unintended and amazing effect of my sending
    out this list: the people who receive it keep their eye on new 
    words, and when they find some, they send those words to me.

    Please do more of this!  It makes my day, every day it happens.

Okay. Now here comes the long-winded part where I say some words about 
    words.  If you want to skip these particular words and get on to 
    the main list of words, you can do so by searching ahead for ']]'. 
    Go ahead! I'm not looking!  I'll never know, and I wouldn't blame 
    you if I did know.

]] 0. Some words about words.

["We teach ... that there are as many words as colors, and there 
  are so many thoughts because the world itself is to be born into 
  words."]

Hi! Been a minute.  Seventeen months full of them, to be exact.

"Action expresses priorities", Gandhi is said to have said.  If that's 
    the case then I suppose my inaction on these words says everything 
    that needs to be said.  But then again, Gandhi's /actions/ were 
    arguably just the inevitable expressions of priorities laid out in 
    the /words/ of others, mostly his mentor-at-a-distance, Tolstoy, who 
    has often been described as a man of letters and/or words but 
    never really one of actions. Except, of course, the action of
    writing words. Take that, Gandhi.

So, I guess the point is that words could be said to be paramount over 
    actions, that they could be both chicken and egg.  This line of 
    causality - words shaping actions, or at least laying out the space 
    in which actions are defined - might seem incoherent or 
    counterintuitive. But I think it's pretty powerful.  And so does 

["A talent for speaking differently, rather than for arguing well, is 
  the chief instrument of cultural change."]

Those are some words from that guy named Rorty.  He wrote a book 
    called 'Contingency, Irony, and Solidarity', which was gifted to 
    me just about seventeen months ago.  The book is about a lot of 
    things, all of which are relevant to this enterprise, and some of 
    which I disagree with so strongly that I get angry and imagine 
    yelling at him while he sits there calmly dismissing me in his 
    dismissive, gravelly monotone[1].  But to keep this email 
    (relatively) short I'll focus on just one of the things he says, 
    one that I agree with.  Which is this:

That sentence up there, the one about speaking differently, is 
    followed by these:

    "What political utopians since the French Revolution have sensed 
     is ... that changing languages and other social practices may 
     produce human beings of a sort that had never before existed.  
     The German idealists, the French revolutionaries, and the 
     Romantic poets had in common a dim sense that human beings whose 
     language changed so that they no longer spoke of themselves as 
     responsible to nonhuman powers would thereby become a new kind 
     of human beings."

Rorty argues that the revolutions (cultural, artistic, political) of 
    the Enlightenment were entirely contingent on - and, I'd argue, 
    an inevitable consequence of - the fact that humans had learned 
    to speak of themselves as no longer beholden to any nonhuman 
    force. That is, after Galileo and Martin Luther, the centrality 
    of religion was no longer absolute. The change happened over 
    generations, beginning perhaps even before Martin Luther and 
    Galileo, making its way via murmurs through the decades, until 
    one morning the masses found themselves storming the Bastille as 
    though it were the only reasonable thing for a thinking human to 
    do.

The idea that all of these tangible revolutions in life and thought 
    were predicated on a shift in language, of speaking in a way that 
    subtly but irrevocably unmoored religion from authority, is 
    certainly interesting. But his really revolutionary contribution 
    is not the historical narrative around that particular change, 
    but instead a proposal about the nature of expressed cognition:
    that speaking in new ways opened up new ways of being. In other
    words, that the true impact of these revolutionary actions was 
    channeled through the ways they changed how we speak of the world,
    and how we speak about ourselves.

We know that speaking with another person in the same language 
    requires holding certain assumptions about the structure of things: 
    causality (subject and object), genderizing, interpersonal 
    relationships, the order in which we parse parts of speech. So at 
    some level it is obvious that communication within just one 
    vocabulary precludes at least some degree of truly novel thought. 
    Expanding on this idea, though, as Rorty does, is a way of looking 
    at the world that I think opens up exciting opportunities. It 
    allows us to ask: Where in our world is there vocabulary to 
    create?

[No gods, but still... masters?]

Here's one idea: We may now be largely freed from authoritarian religion, 
    but we still speak as though we are responsible to nonhuman powers, 
    powers whose effect on our ability to think of ourselves as free 
    is just as confining as the explicit control of a central religious 
    authority. The irony (get it, irony[2]) here is that the masters that 
    we are today "responsible" to are in large part products of the 
    Enlightenment about which Rorty wrote so breathlessly.

Some will argue that the dialogue has already shifted away, that 
    doubts about this post-Enlightenment order have already been sown,
    that the talk is turned to new "solutions".  But can you really 
    "change the conversation" without changing the vocabulary? Aren't 
    arguments and solutions expressed in the old way of talking about 
    ourselves carrying embedded inside them many of the same concepts 
    we wish to expire?

["... inventions against wind and a vocabulary imposed for two hundred 
  years."]

So, I'll wrap up with a request. Isn't it neat that playing with words 
    could have such incredible consequences?  Why don't you try it 
    yourself? In what ways could you speak differently, ways that do 
    not presuppose fealty to the current pantheon?  

In other words... I think we can expand on Gandhi's lemma. If action 
    expresses priorities, then words express possibilities.  Think 
    about how can you change the words to open up space for new kinds 
    of actions, and new systems of priorities.

I look forward to hearing what you come up with.

in ironic solidarity,
aaron
o1.o6.2o13

[1] If you haven't heard it, you can hear it lots of places, for 
    example here: http://www.kqed.org/a/forum/R601311000.  I find his 
    voice alternately amusing and frustrating, depending on whether or 
    not I agree with what he's saying.

[2] Rorty's definition of an ironist:
    (a) She has radical and continuing doubts about the final 
        vocabulary she currently uses, because she has been impressed 
        by other vocabularies, vocabularies taken as final by people 
        or books she has encountered

    (b) she realizes that arguments phrased in her present vocabulary 
        can neither underwrite nor dissolve these doubts

    (c) insofar as she philosophizes about her situation, she does not 
        think that her vocabulary is closer to reality than others, or 
        that it is in touch with a power not herself.


]] 1. neo-to-melogisms: the wordstuff!

    ratiocination: the process of exact thinking [via amanda j g]

    praxeology: Praxeology is the study of human action. 
                Etymologically defined as "the science of human action". 
                The most common use of the term is in connection with 
                the Austrian School of economics.

    irrefragable: impossible to refute; indisputable. [via jonathan 
                  scheff]

    anomie: a personal feeling of a lack of social norms; 
            normlessness. [via danah]

    metonymy: a figure of speech used in rhetoric in which a thing or 
              concept is not called by its own name, but by the name 
              of something intimately associated with that thing or 
              concept. For instance, "Wall Street" is used as a 
              metonym for the finance industry.

    blet: To undergo a special form of decay to which fleshy fruits 
          are subject.  Some fruit needs to undergo bletting in order 
          to be edible. [via fenna]

    cucubuth: from Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy (which word he 
              nicked in turn from famous 11th century Persian Avicenna 
              / ibn Sina), It was apparently Avicenna's term for
              lycanthropy, but it seems also to be used in a more 
              limited sense, as the name of a type of Portuguese 
              werevampire. [via shervin]

    ophidian: Of, relating to, or resembling snakes. [via sang]

    ambsace: 1. the lowest throw at dice, the double ace. 2. bad luck; 
             misfortune. (from Latin: ambas 'both' + as 'unit') [via 
             tristan]

    weltschmerz: mental depression or apathy caused by comparison of 
                 the actual state of the world with an ideal state 
                 [via fenna]

    apathendipity: an unsought, unintended, and/or unexpected 
                   discovery that happens by accident while lacking
                   emotion or motivation about a person, activity, or
                   object.

    zielschmerz: "the exhilarating dread of finally pursuing a 
                 lifelong dream, which requires you to put your true 
                 abilities out there to be tested on the open 
                 savannah, no longer protected inside the terrarium of 
                 hopes and delusions that you created in kindergarten 
                 and kept sealed as long as you could, only to break 
                 in case of emergency."

    Walter Mitty: an ordinary, often ineffectual person who indulges 
                  in fantastic daydreams of personal triumphs.

    noumenology: the study of intelligible reality beyond experience

    'pataphysics: is a philosophy or pseudophilosophy dedicated to 
                  studying what lies beyond the realm of metaphysics. 
                  'pataphysics deals with "the laws which govern 
                  exceptions and will explain the universe 
                  supplementary to this one". In 'pataphysics, every 
                  event in the universe is accepted as an 
                  extraordinary event.  [via fenna]

    blague: pretentious but empty talk.

    echolalia: the automatic repetition of vocalizations made by 
               another person.

    misophonia: literally “hatred of sound”, is a form of decreased 
                sound tolerance, also known as Selective Sound 
                Sensitivity Syndrome.

    punding: a stereotypy of repetitive or ritualistic movement, 
             posture, or utterance, found in patients with mental 
             retardation, autism spectrum.

    otaku (japanese): Young people who are highly skilled in or 
                      obsessed with computer technology to the 
                      detriment of their social skills.

    eponysterical: Internet posts and comments which are funny in 
                   light of the poster's user name.

    piropo: An amorous compliment, a flirtatious remark.
            "In Argentina these expressions of admiration, when well
            constructed are not only traditional but even an art form.  
            The more clever the piropo the more it is appreciated by 
            its intended recipient." [via sara h]

    aubade: a morning love song (as opposed to a serenade, which is in 
            the evening), or a song or poem about lovers separating at 
            dawn.  It has also been defined as "a song or instrumental 
            composition concerning, accompanying, or evoking daybreak"

    compersion: a state of empathetic happiness and joy experienced 
                when an individual's current or former romantic 
                partner experiences happiness and joy through an 
                outside source, including, but not limited to, another 
                romantic interest. [via anya k]

    reminition: Similar to a premonition, but about the past. The 
                closest approximation would be Socrates' idea of 
                recollection. [via chris honey]

    kummerspeck (german): Excess weight gained due to emotion-caused 
                          overeating.

    Fernweh: literally, “farsickness”; “an ache for distant places". 
             Since the term is a noun, its initial letter is always 
             capitalized in German language ("Wanderlust"), but is 
             written in lower case in English language ("wanderlust") 
             [via matt von rocketstein].

    ichariba chode (japanese): "though we meet but once, even by 
                                chance, we are already friends."

    fissiparous: 1. inclined to cause or undergo division into 
                 separate parts or groups. 2. (of an organism) 
                 Reproducing by fission.

    Kyriarchy: a neologism coined by Elisabeth Schussler Fiorenza and 
               derived from the Greek words for “lord” or “master” 
               (kyrios) and “to rule or dominate” (archein) which 
               seeks to redefine the analytic category of patriarchy 
               in terms of multiplicative intersecting structures of 
               domination.  Kyriarchy is best theorized as a complex 
               pyramidal system of intersecting multiplicative social 
               structures of superordination and subordination, of 
               ruling and oppression. [via amy l]

    [the following are so-called "archaic" words, candidates for 
     excision.  All via matt von rocketstein]
        Deliciate: To delight one's self; to indulge in feasting; to 
                   revel.
        Bever: A light repast between meals; a lunch.
        Supererogate: an effort above and beyond the call of duty.
        Younker: a young nobleman
        Charabanc: a vehicle carrying many passengers; used for public 
                   transport.
        Brabble: quibble; argue over petty things;
        Frigorific: causing cold; cooling or chilling.

    ambit: The scope, extent, or bounds of something: "within the 
           ambit of federal law".

    boskier: 1. covered with bushes, shrubs, and small trees; woody. 
             2. shady.

    florilegia: an anthology of short literary pieces and poems and 
                ballads.

    flambant neuf (french): literally, “burning new” – is the French 
                            equivalent of the English “brand new.”

    crepitate: Make a crackling sound. "the night crepitates with a 
               whistling cacophony"; "crepitating electricity". [via 
               jane]

    skpepu: Word created by Dr. Iván Ortega-Santos on 4 November 2009 
            to describe generative grammar's purpose: to be able to 
            describe what a speaker of a certain language really knows 
            about said language.
            'Skpepu' cannot be a word in Spanish because it does 
            not follow the logical sound patterns--or grammatical 
            rules-- in the Spanish language. 'Papu' can be a word in 
            Spanish, though it doesn't exist, because it follows 
            logical sound patterns. 

]] 2. novelogisms: Words I've seen created/reappropriated, or helped 
                   create/reappropriate.

    ingratiation point: the moment before or after which you are 
                        capable of making overt positive gestures even 
                        in spite of people being cold or mean:
                        "They've been consistently awful, I'm past the 
                         ingratiation point"
                        "I'm still burned over what happened, I'm not 
                         yet at the ingratiation point"

    subrelication: defined with an example: There is a beautiful Go 
                   table made out of bamboo. Instead of playing go on 
                   it, you show this specimen the utmost disregard, by 
                   placing a laptop on it, and proceed to play Go 
                   online via the laptop. [jane]

    ottomanottomaton: a word for putting your feet on a stooped over 
                      turkish guy [jane]

    luddwriter: a typewriter from which you can send emails 
                [jane with the hat trick!!!]

    tautism: an affliction wherein the sufferer is unable to 
             identify/understand circular arguments. this joke
             naturally follows:
        "How can you tell if you are tautistic?"
        "If you are diagnosed with tautism."

        [team effort: ben h, janice, nathan w, myself]
    
    redtardation: red-green colorblindness [nathan w] 

    taxidermy: The outer layer of skin of a for-hire passenger 
               vehicle.  Often yellow and weathered, and stuffed full 
               of foriegn-made objects.

    truculent: A borrowed pushcart, used to forcibly carry the wayward 
               and rideless to post-Mardi Gras, pre-Easter religious 
               services.

]] 3. lacking-logisms: These definitions could really use a word. Send 
                       me your ideas!

    auditory palette cleanser - not a specific case, like white noise, 
                                but the general idea of erasing the 
                                effect that your recent history of 
                                sound could have on the next sounds 
                                you hear.
                                this could apply to palette cleansers 
                                that reset your baseline within 
                                categories of sound - for instance, a 
                                piece of music that opens you up for 
                                the next to follow, or that buzzing 
                                deafness you hear in the woods before 
                                you realize you can suddenly hear a 
                                bird chirping.

    "The feeling you get when you recover something you thought was 
     lost, like something you believed was really gone. It is more 
     than the absence of a negative, it is its own thing. It is more
     than relief, because there is new appreciation for the thing, 
     like seeing it for the first time. As someone who loses things 
     often (metro cards, credit cards, bracelets, umbrellas) --
     everytime I experience this it fills me with a kind of raw 
     gratitude, that I had been taking for granted something that I 
     should not have. Like the opposite of carelessness in
     perception. And, also, I suppose, a kind of forgiveness of self, 
     for being slightly better than the person you believed yourself 
     to be during the panicked hours of searching." [jackie r]

    "The inability to decipher emoticons?" (not emotions, emotiCONS) 
        (this is ironic because autistic people love emoticons, as 
         they clearly convey a writer's emotional state)
        [janice / nathan w / ben h]

]] 4. mislogisms: Words that dont mean the right thing (This section 
                  needs a better name)

    These via Amos:
        prolix
        temerity sounds not unlike timorous but means the opposite
        spendthrift should mean someone who's thrifty. It means the 
            opposite.

    I'd add 'crepitate', from above, to this list.

]] 5. That's it!

    REMEMBER: please do email me all of your new words (and 
              possiblities-for-words)!

    

